Protocols
protocols is a set of rules describes how data flow over a network.
protocols needed for communication between any two devices.

TCP/IP protocol suite
TCP?IP dos not have an official layer structure
Actually TCP/IP reference model has been built on its protocols.
Transmssion control Protocol
	Connection oriented
	reliable delivery of data
	ordering of delivery
User Datagram Protocol(UDP)
	Connectionless service
	delivery is not Guaranteed

Protocol Port Number
        TCP 				                          UDP

Ftp                     20,21                                                                 DNS        53
SSH                   22				DHCP     67
Telnet               23				TFTP       69
SMTP               25				SNMP    161
HTTP               80
POP3               110
NTP                 123
IMAP4            143
HTTPS           443

File Tranfer Protocol----file upload and download file
Telnet ---------------------used to remote login(not secured)
SSH (secure Shell)(y use)-------------- Also used to remote login(secured (used in compamies))
Simple mail tranfer protocol-------- --Used to sent the mail
Hyper text tranfer protocol------------website
Post office protocol---------------------used to recieve the mail
Network Time protocol----------------used to manage the time in org.(in case of multiple devices) 
Internet Access Protocol---used to manage all the mails centralised using mail server
HTTPS----------to make website secured


Domain naming system-----resolve ip to name .vice-versa
DHCP---------assign Ip address automatically
TrevailFTP------secured ftp.
SimpleNtworkManagementProtocol----to monitoring purpose and manage network.

Communication Modes
	The communication modes refer to the manner in which the two devices in a network communicate with each other.
	There are three typs of modes 
	1. Simplex Communication.
	2.Half Duplex -do-
	3. Duplex -do- 

Simplex Communication.
	communication channel can transfer data in only one direction.

Half Duplex Communication.
	the half duplex mode communication can send the data in both directions but not simultaneously. It can either us ethe communicatiobn channel to send the data or the same channel can be used to receive the data at a time.
	EX:Walkie-talkies are the best examples

Full Duplex Communication
	The full duplex communication permits data to be sent and received by the same communication channel simultaneously.
	The full duplex communixcation can be compared to a two way bridge on a two lane highway.
 EX: Mobile are the best example.


Messaging Types:
	There are three different kinds of messages which have to be sent from one device to another through network.

1.Unicast
2.Multicast.
3.Broadcast.

1. Unicast: Unicast is the communication between a single sender and a single recevier through the network.

2. Multi-cast:
	Multicast is the delivery of infromation to a group of destination system simultaneously using the most efficient strategy to deliver the messages over each link of the network.

3.BroadCast.
	Broadcast is used to send the inforamtion from one source to multiple systems. One sender sends the inforamtion to all connected receviers.Broadcast transmission is supported on most LANs and can be used to send message to all computers on the LAN.

