
Transmission Media
the transmission media is the physical path between transmitter and reciever in a data trasmission system.

types
guided media
the waves are guided along a solid medium
such as
Twisted pair
	Information is transmitted by sendung electrical current through the wires.
	the twisting tends to decrese the cross talk interface between adjacent pairs.
	2 types
	UTP--Unshielded twisted pair
	STP--shielded twisted pair
	categories
	cat1
	cat2
	cat3
	cat4
	above cats are used for telephone lines
	cat5
	cat6
	cat7
	above networking
	in networking 2 types
	1 straight through cable
	2 cross over cable 
co-axial
	is used to transmit both analog and digital signals
	carry higher frequencies and much data rates.
	Less inteference and cross-talk than twisted pair for long distance transmission of 	analog signals, amplifiers are needed ever few kilometers

	2 types of Co-axial Cable
		1 Thinnet cable
		2 Thicknet Cable
	same devices------we uses cross cable
	Different devices--we use straight through cable
	but only in between router and pc we use cross over cable becoz they act as same 	devices.(pc can be configured to the router )
	console cable is used to configure
	to connect 2 pc we use console cable / rolled over cable

	Widely installed for use in business and coporation Ethernet and other types of LANs.
	Consists of inter copper insulator covered by cladding material and then covered by an 	outer jacket
		physical descripton
			inner conductor is solid copper metal
			seperated by insulating material
			outer conductor is braided shield
			covered by sheath materail

		Plastic like materail, used to seperate the inner conducutor from the 		outer conductor.
		The outer conductor is a fine cylidrical mesh made from copper.
		Diameter 0.4 to about 1 inch.
		
Application of coaxial cable
Tv distribution
long distance telephone transmission



optic fibres
transmit ligth signals Inner core of glass or plastic that
the outer most layer is the jacket. this jacket is composed of plastic.
50 microns in diameter

2 types of OFC
1 single mode 

2 multimode
multimode fiber is optical fiber that is designed to carry multiple light rays or modes concurrently, each at a slightly different reflection angle within the optical fiber core. used for relatively short distances because tye modes tend to disperse over longer lengths(this is called as dispersion)

for longer distances, single mode fiber(sometimes called monomode) fiber is used. 
In single mode fiber a single ray or mode of light act as a carrier.


unguided Transmission media


Infrared
infrared ligth is electromagnetic radiation with a wavelength longer than that of visible ligth.

bluetooth
bluetooth is wireless protocol for exchanging data over short ditances from fixed and mobile devices, creating personal area networks(PAN).

Troubleshooting commands
* ping
*Tracert
* Ipconfig
*ipconfig /all
*ping ipaddress -t
*Netstat
*Netsh winsock reset(for resetting NIC card)

trouble shooting steps:{internet not browsing}
1cmd--> ipconfig
	if error[]
	APIPA[169.254.10.100]----configure the manual ip address given by ISP
2.ping the modem(ping 192.168.1.1) check 
3.ping to DNS (ping DNS ip)if is piniging then connection is there bet ISP to pc
4. ping global website(ping yahoo.com)
5.check your pc proxy setting ---disable it--security setting--reinstall browser---use default setting.


Wireless systems.
1. Cellular systems.
2.Wireless LANS
3.Satellite systems.
4.Paging Systems.
5.PAN Systems.

Wireless 
	1. This is an alternative to wired technology which is commonly used for connecting devices in wireless mode.
	2. WiFi(Wireless Fidelity) is a generic term that refers to IEEE 802.11 standard for wireless local area networks (WLAN).

The wifi tech
	these use Radio Technologies to transmit and receive data at high speed.
	IEEE 802.11b.	
	IEEE 802.11a.
	IEEE 802.11g.

1.IEEE 802.11b:
	1.Appear in late 1999.
	2.Operates at 2.4GHz radio spectrum.
	3.11 Mbps (therotical speed)- within 30 m range.
	4.4-6 Mbps(actual speed)
	5.100- 150 feet range
	6.most popular, least expensive.
	7.Interference from mobile phones and bluetooth devices which can reduce the transmission speed.

2.IEEE 802.11a:
	1.Introduced in 2001.
	2.Operates at 5GHz (less popoular)
	3.54Mbps (theoretical speed)
	4.15-20 Mbps(Actual Speed)
	5.50-75 feet range.
	6.More expensive.
	7.Not compatible with 802.11b.

3.IEEE 802.11g:
	Intro in 2003.
	Combine the feature of both standards.
	100-150 feet range.
	54 Mbps speed.
	2.4 GHz radio frequencies.
	Compatible with "b".

WiFi  Topologies.
Peer to Peer topology(Ad-hoc Mode)

AP -based topology (Infrastructure Mode)  

Peer to Peer: 
	1.AP is not required.
	2.Client devices within a cell communicate with each other directly.
	3.It is useful for setting up a wireless network quickly and easily.

AP- based topology:
	1.the client communicate through access point.
	2.Any communication has to go through AP.
	3.If a mobile station(MS), like a computer, a PDA, Or a phone, wants to communicate with another MS, it needs to send the information to AP first, then AP sends it to the destination MS.